---
layout: "post"
title: "What's up with Mortal Kombat 11's Meter System?"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: /blog/mk11-meter
---
<section id="projects">
<div class="user-details">
<p align="left">
Mortal Kombat 11 (MK11) presents a new way to think about meter in fighting game design. In a genre with such established norms like fighting games, it can sometimes be rare to see such fundamentally different ideas surfacing. The MK11 system isn’t necessarily better or worse than the traditional meter system, but it is different and, so far, it seems to be functional and fun. I want to take a look at the possible reasons for their change and, generally speaking, how this new system changes the way fighters think about the game.
<!--more-->
</p>
<p align="left">
First, we need to understand what meter is. Meter is a staple of the fighting game genre. Simply put, it’s a renewable resource that you can expend to perform special actions within the game. Typically, it works like this: Both players begin with no meter. They gain meter for hitting people, getting hit, blocking, and just generally over the course of playing the game. They can spend meter in chunks to perform special actions, usually stronger versions of their special attacks or super moves. Many fighting games have their own special implementations of meter, but by and large they all work based on that preset template. This is, of course, because it works. It feels natural to build up power while you fight and the decisions that can be made about when and how to spend the meter adds depth to the game.
</p>
<p align="left">
Netherrealm Studio’s (NRS) games up to this point, specifically MK9, MKX, Injustice (IJ), and Injustice 2, all used a meter system that worked very similarly to the traditional template. Like most fighting games, they had certain elements attached that made them unique. For these games, it was the addition of some defensive uses for meter, such as invincible rolls, air dodges, and the ability to break out of combos early. On top of that, they had the typical uses of a super move, called an X-Ray in the MK series, and doing enhanced versions of regular special moves, called either Enhanced, Meter Burn, or Amplified depending on if you’re playing MK9, 10, or 11. The importance here is that there is a multitude of ways to spend meter in NRS games. This is something that clearly influenced the development of MK11’s new system.
</p>
<p align="left">
MK11’s system works like this: Players have two separate meters. One is for Offensive actions. The other is for Defensive.  Both meters default state is full at the beginning of a match. Instead of being recharged based on the actions of the players, it is recharged at a static rate based on how the player spent it. The super moves, whose name was changed from X-Rays to Fatal Blows, are now not tied to meter whatsoever and can be used freely once a player loses enough health. All of these things set MK11’s system apart from other NRS games and, for the most part, from the entire fighting game genre. I’ll look at them each and how they affect the game.
</p>
<p align="center">
Why Two Meters?
</p>
<p align="left">
As stated, they split up the meter for offensive and defensive options. I think the reasoning for this stems from the sheer number of options for meter usage in a typical NRS game. Splitting them into two separate resources means that interesting gameplay can happen on a more consistent basis as players swap from offense to defense and back again, without having had spent meter on one mean that you have less options for the other. Not to mention that meter usage was a pretty clear divide between offensive and defensive uses already, meaning the transition to two separate meters is not an extremely jarring choice. On top of this, the amount of utility options for meter usage in NRS games has meant in games past that we somewhat rarely saw super moves, as those spent your entire meter in one go and that was not usually considered worth it. By making Fatal Blows in MK11 independent of any meter, they allow players to still experience the thrill of using them without feeling like they are kneecapping themselves.
</p>
<p align="center">
Why Refill Meter Automagically?
</p>
<p align="left">
Meter refilling automatically streamlines gameplay. There is no longer any need to worry about meter accrual. This does remove a bit of complexity from the game, but I wouldn’t say that it’s a terrible loss. Optimizing your actions for meter gain was never very flashy or exciting, it was just something that people do to be optimal. When not consciously doing everything a player can to gain the most meter possible, there is a general feeling in most fighting games that meter raises itself anyway. It is typically gained by hitting or getting hit, which, surprise surprise, happen all the time without the players needing to really think about it. Thus, it feels natural that after someone uses meter for an enhanced technique, then they have to wait a while before they can again, almost like a cooldown. The MK11 system just goes a step further in the direction of actually making it such, which simplifies things. There’s also a degree of fear built into using up defensive meter because of the static refill rate. Because there is nothing a player can do to regain meter faster, they have to make a strong commitment to being vulnerable for a considerable amount of time whenever they choose to use defensive meter.
</p>
<p align="center">
Why Do They Start Full?
</p>
<p align="left">
This choice is deceptively strong. In MK11, having full meter is your typical state. Because it refills itself, players find themselves with the required resources for advanced techniques more often than not if they are performing well. This means that instead of having the meter to perform special actions being something like a treat or accomplishment, it is a player’s default choice. Optimal play is the default mindset in MK11. For example, many kombos in NRS games, and in most fighting games using traditional meter systems, rely upon using meter for optimal damage. In MK11, a player’s typical bread-and-butter combo will involve meter usage. This is a significant shift in mindset caused somewhat subtly by having meter default to full and refill by itself.
</p>
<p align="center">
What’s the Result?
</p>
<p align="left">
MK11’s meter system is a fresh new take on an old, established concept. NRS made a bold choice giving players two meters, making them start full, and refill by themselves. So far, the results seem to work rather well. The new system allows players to play at a higher level on a more consistent basis, with optimal play being their base mindset. Impressively, the system both allows for this more consistent depth of play while also streamlining the process of actually thinking about meter. They’ve made their meter system almost more of a cooldown system, which is easy for players to understand and matches the underlying feeling of a traditional system regardless. This cooldown-type meter also places a perceived higher level of stakes on certain choices. Players can’t do anything to regain meter more quickly, making it seem like a bigger choice to use it than it perhaps really is. These changes are very interesting and I hope to see more innovative takes on fighting game design in the coming years.
</p>
